look at this thing it's ridiculous I
mean have you ever seen anything like
that before in your life because I don't
really haven't
so for those of you who are new here we
do space is weird on this channel and
weird is a good thing and this week's
weird thing is I c418
also known as the spirograph nebula for
those of you who remember that toy when
you were a kid spirograph that used to
make those really cool shapes with those
cogs that you would put your pen in and
whined all the way around and you can
probably see why it's called that it has
a very striking similarity to spire
graph and I actually learned that the
official term for those shapes is a
hippo truck oeid and an epic trochoidal
are inside the circle and move the pen
around and an epic Rock oeid is when you
put your cog and your pen outside the
circle and work your way around it see
you learn something new every day
so I c418 is what we call a planetary
nebula
it's about 3,600 light years away from
Earth in the direction of the
constellation of lapis which is just
underneath or at least underneath from
the northern hemisphere a riot and if
you're in the southern hemisphere it
will just be above Orion and it's about
0.3 light-years across it's something in
our own Milky Way galaxy and even though
it's called a planetary nebula it has
absolutely nothing to do with planets
it's a historical term that was coined
when people didn't really understand
what these things actually were they
were round and fuzzy in the sky so they
were dubbed planetary nebulae because
well planets around and nebula where all
of the fuzzy things in the sky but
didn't look like stars nebula is Latin
meaning sort of like a cloud or a fog
and the name is still used today even
though we now know better and we know
that these planetary nebulae are
actually the remnants of stars that have
ended their lives now these aren't
supernova remnants a supernova is when a
truly massive star so something like 20
to 100 times the mass of the Sun runs
out of fuel collapses in on itself and
then bounces back in an explosion or a
supernova
instead planetary nebulae at the
remnants of stars that are very much
like the Sun so everywhere from sort of
the mass in the Sun to about eight times
the mass of the Sun when these stars run
out of fuel first of all they swell up
these big red giant stars and we think
the Sun will do that one day maybe even
swelling up to sort of go past the orbit
of Mars essentially what the star does
when it runs out of hydrogen to burn
like it normally does with nuclear
fusion like the Sun is doing all the
time is that it poof's out those outer
layers into this red giant star as it
starts to burn helium in its core
instead when it starts to run out of all
of that then it can't hold on to those
outer layers anymore and they sort of
just get pooped out into space and
you're left with these beautifully round
planetary nebulae and what you're left
behind with in the middle is a white
dwarf star which is sort of like the old
core of the star where it used to be
doing all of that nuclear fusion but now
it's just this sort of pile of inert
helium as I said this is the eventual
fate of the Sun but not for another five
billion years or so we're actually
really lucky to be able to see these
beautiful planetary nebulae because they
don't actually last for very long
they're only around for about ten
thousand years or so quick and then that
and that might sound like a long time to
me and you but astronomically it's like
the blink of an eye you know compared to
the sun's ten billion year lifetime and
so what these planetary nebulae are made
of is just this really under dense gas
that has just been poofed off into the
surrounding space so it's amazing that
we can even see that gas cuz well look
around us right now we can't see the air
in front of us and so the only reason
we're actually able to see these
planetary nebulae is because the gas in
them is ionized and it's glowing so what
does that mean so what's happening is
that that white dwarf core that's left
behind after this planetary nebula is
formed is actually still giving off a
lot of energy it's still radiating a lot
of light in particular UV light and so
that UV radiation actually impacts that
gas that's surrounding it so it will
mostly be hydrogen but it'll be some
helium around there as well maybe a
little bit oxygen and nitrogen sprinkled
in as well and what that UV radiation
does is
give the electrons in those atoms enough
energy to escape the atom and that's
what we mean by ionized we mean that the
atoms are no longer neutral they'll have
a positive charge because they've lost
one of their electrons that's now free
to roam space so for example if an
oxygen atom has one electron missing
that's called an oxygen ion and it will
be written o plus to show that it has a
positive charge although that's not the
notation that astronomers use we would
call that o and then to Roman numerals
because oh and one Roman numeral would
clearly be neutral oxygen and Oh with
two Roman numerals means that one
electron is missing it's incredibly
confusing but again historic notation
and we stick with it now if you have
ionized gas like that very low densities
light you have in a planetary nebula
then the UV radiation is still coming
from that white dwarf core will actually
be able to cause the remaining electrons
in the atoms because one of them to jump
up an energy level if you remember
chemistry at high school we had sort of
the levels of electrons around atoms it
can jump up to one of those there's all
supposed to be there so it actually ends
up dropping back down against where it's
supposed to be and in that process it
gives out light now because those
electron levels are separated by exactly
the same amount of energy every single
time according to you know quantum
mechanics but you know governs atoms the
same amount of energy will always be
released and what's released is a photon
and a photon with the same amount of
energy will be a specific color or
wavelength every single time in a normal
density gas all those ionized atoms
would actually collide and that would
actually prevent those electrons from
jumping up and jumping back down so we
actually call this emission of photons
from this ionized gas forbidden emission
or actually forbidden lines because what
you see if you split the light from the
planetary nebula up into all of its
component wavelengths is that you see
these huge big peaks of these emission
lines at these certain colors or
wavelength that correspond to hydrogen
and oxygen and nitrogen
that's been ionized this is actually how
we get color in space images so for
example this image was taken with the
Hubble Space Telescope probably through
a filter that only let through the light
from ionized hydrogen or only let
through the light from ionized oxygen we
know the light from ionized hydrogen is
sort of a green part of the spectrum and
the oxygen is sort of the blue part of
the spectrum and nitrogen is sort of the
red part of the spectrum and so what you
do is you take those three images and
then you color them all and you add them
together and you get what your eyes
would roughly see if your eyes were that
sensitive to collect that much light in
one go otherwise you know with your own
eyes you probably wouldn't actually get
that much light from that object these
emission lines though the main way that
we identify planetary nebulae now so the
spirograph nebula is definitely a
planetary nebula because it has a lot of
emission in hydrogen and oxygen and
nitrogen but it means that a lot of
planetary nebulae we now have are no
longer round sort of the original name
comes from for example we spoke about
the hourglass nebula on this channel
before we don't understand why that's
not round but it's definitely an
interesting shape to study same for the
spirograph nebula as well which is such
a weird a wonderful object for us to try
and explain it yeah okay it's round like
a lot of planetary nebulae are because
well stars around so when they puff off
their layers they come out in a nice
circle as well but then you've got this
really interesting spirograph structure
in there too that we're not really sure
where it came from or how it got that
shape there's one leading hypothesis at
the minute but not everybody is
convinced it's especially easy to see
the spirograph structure if you just
look at the image of this thing when you
only let through the hydrogen ionized
emission I could stare at this image all
day it's mesmerizing you can get lost in
it and it's this structure that people
have been trying to explain for over a
decade now and we still haven't quite
fully figured it out but if you're a lot
of people like it's 20/20 how come we
can't explain this but of course our
observations of this thing
were incredibly limited for a long time
so you can see this in a paper from the
1950s by Wilson and Alla you can see
this was an image of ic4 when I taken
using a telescope on the ground and
really this thing is just a blurry round
Bob you don't see any of that really
coarse paragraph structure because
you're looking through the atmosphere so
it wasn't until the year 2000 that the
Hubble Space Telescope finally looked at
this thing that we actually got enough
detail to be able to see that spirograph
structure and I'm sure that just
highlights people why astronomers love
Hubble so much because it just is
leagues above what you can do from the
ground and you'll see on the Hubble
website that actually sort of posted
this image for the first time that it
says that we still don't understand this
object now the way we observe objects in
space is getting much better we're
coming up with new ways and more
innovative ways of doing this all the
time one of the ways of doing that is
something called an if' you an integral
field unit and what that does instead of
just taking one spectra of one object in
the sky so just taking all the light
from that object and splitting it into a
spectrum and seeing what you get what
you can do instead is sort of jigsaw the
object up and you can take a fiber-optic
cable and just get the spectrum from
that little piece of the nebula and that
little piece in that little piece and
make this cool mosaic of the whole
object and so in 2017 de Peter and
collaborators actually managed to
observe I c418 with an if' you called
wifes the wide field spectrograph on the
2.3 meter telescope at siding spring
Observatory in the Warren bungles
National Park I have actually been lucky
enough to go to this observatory it is
spectacular the southern hemisphere sky
there is just like no other I really
just wanted while I was there to just
lay on the ground for just hours at a
time and stare at the sky but I was also
really terrified of like snakes and
spiders that could have got me in
Australia everything wants to kill you
there but what this is you gives you is
sort of how much energy is found sort of
radially as it moves
words from that white dwarf star in the
middle out in this planetary nebula and
the reason is because it takes a
different amount of energy to ionize
different atoms so the ratio of the
amount of each emission that you get
tells you how much energy is in that
region in the nebula you can also from
these ifu specters get the velocity of
the gas that's giving off that emission
too because you would expect it to be a
sharp peak but it's actually quite
broadened because some of the material
is moving away from you and some of it
is coming towards you and so it's red
shifted and blue shift and you can see
that in the spectra and so if you can
work out you know how broad the peaks
are that you are detecting then you can
work out what speed it's moving at if
you have the speed you can sort of get a
timescale for how long it's been
evolving for because you know how far
it's gone and if you just sort of work
your way back you'll you'll get to the
time that it sort of left the middle
from but also what they found that
although the energy obviously the white
dwarf is giving off is just UV light as
that hits into the gas it causes like a
shock front the ionization isn't
instantaneous and that shock front
actually has to travel through the
medium to fully ionized everything
around it and so that ionization shock
front isn't actually moving at a uniform
speed because probably there's denser
patches of gas here and there but what
that caused is because it's not moving
at a uniform speed is for you to get
sort of instabilities that disrupt that
movement through the gas and leave
behind these weird little clumps of
material that are growing much brighter
that you then detect when you see the
emission from the ionization and that's
what gives you this weird pattern
because if you look really hard at this
image and you stare at it for a really
long time hopefully you'll be able to
convince yourself but actually none of
those bits of structure actually connect
to give you a spirograph shape there's
no actual line that you can follow to
make one of those hipot Roco a trick of
the eye that sort of fills in those gaps
when you see it from further away
it's actually sort of very almost
textured and fluffy in a way it reminds
me of the flocculent spiral galaxies'
the things that when you look at them
you're like yes that's a spiral galaxy
but when you ask yourself how many
spiral arms does it have you'd be there
forever trying to put a number on it
because they have this sort of weird
fluffy texture to them but that non
uniformly moving ionization shock from
hypothesis from de Peter in carburetors
it's just that it's just one hypothesis
it's not actually fully accepted
scientific theory yet future
observations of this object know more
and more of them will hopefully tell but
who knows if we will ever understand
this beautiful weird and wonderful
creature
the drillings restarted next door I'm
just gonna have to film and I hope that
that drilling noise you can't hear it
over the mic because you can't hear the
piano guy next door when he plays so
fingers crossed but if not if there's
this weird background noise so the whole
video you know that's what it is it's
next door drilling and an epic rock I it
is when you do is sit in an epic rock
and an epic rock eyed and nebula em is
it nebula Greek or is nebula also what
they found is that as that energy comes
off the white dwarf it obviously will
die damn you ruining the peace and what
they owe
why are you revving again and what they
found
you